[GAIA STUDIO MUSIC]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
Our special guest in this
program, John St. Augustine.
He's a radio host and producer.
He's been called "The
Voice of America"
by veteran broadcaster
Charles Osgood
and has been named a
visionary for using
his voice on the radio
for positive change, which
is important.
He has presented at
the TED conferences,
produced the "Doctor Oz" show,
Earth Matters with Bill Kurtis,
and has authored the bestselling
"Living an Uncommon Life" back
in 2006 and "Every
Moment Matters" in 2009.
And he's probably
got more coming.
John, welcome to
"Beyond Belief."
>>JOHN ST. AUGUSTINE:
it's so good to see you.
I appreciate the time.
>>NOORY: It's been a long time.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It's
been at least five,
six years as I recall.
>>NOORY: Life good?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah,
and we look the same.
>>NOORY: We haven't changed.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Exactly.
So this is good.
>>NOORY: Can we say that
in 10 years from now?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Probably not.
>>NOORY: What's new with you?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Oh, you know,
it's been really busy since you
and I last had time together.
A lot of changes in my life.
And, in some way,
shape, or form,
kind of a transitional time.
I did a lot of radio
for a lot of years,
as you know, and worked
with Oprah, and Dr Oz,
and all those type of things.
And when that kind
of shifted when
Oz went to television
in 2010, my career
started to shift as well.
And I started to
get out of my career
and kind of go back
into my calling.
And I think that's when I
was on the show last time.
>>NOORY: Right.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It was more
about the personal things that
have gone in my life and how
I was able to reassess them
and have some
markers for growth.
And a lot of production
stuff came out,
"Earth Matters,"
as you mentioned,
with Bill Curtis has been
a huge project for us.
I have a new book
coming out soon.
So I sleep well and I eat well.
It's good.
>>NOORY: Well,
you've talked a lot
about near-death
experiences, but what
are near-life experiences?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: So that term--
I think I coined that.
>>NOORY: Yeah, you did.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
And I'll take that.
I gotta put a registered
trademark somewhere.
I've had three times in my
life where I shouldn't be here,
and all three times had
me more alive than dead.
Even though they were
quote unquote "near-death
experiences," they
made me more alive,
which I thought got
me nearer to life.
When I was 19 years old, I
was electrocuted-- shouldn't
be here.
>>NOORY: Oh, boy.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It was
a faulty wiring on a giant
machine, where I was
working in college.
And I was 19 and bulletproof.
And I survived that.
And it shook me up, but it
didn't wake me up fully.
And then when I was 27, I
was in an auto accident,
hit broadside by a drunk
driver, and obliterated the car.
I shouldn't be here.
Both times I kind of had
an out-of-body experience.
And, look, we were talking a
little bit before the show.
We're both Midwestern guys.
I don't even put ketchup
on my hot dog, right?
So I'm very grounded
in how I see things.
And so when I have
experiences that
are outside of how I grew up,
they're very jarring to me.
So 19, that happened; 27, that
happened; and when I was 43,
I donated a kidney
to my daughter,
and you have to sign a piece of
paper that says, you could die.
And the realization
of that really
started getting my
wheels moving forward.
And the worse my life got
sometimes, the more alive
I became, and I don't
think most people see that.
>>NOORY: So you're
functioning with one kidney?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I am.
>>NOORY: And how's
your daughter?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
She's doing well.
She's had some setbacks,
but that was 16 years ago.
>>NOORY: But the fact that
you did this is amazing.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Well, you know,
I don't think it's that
amazing, but I appreciate that.
Oh, it is.
It is.
>>NOORY: I know how rare it is.
I get it.
I don't understand it.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: But we'd
all do that as parents.
>>NOORY: Right, that's a given.
And then there's
this other thing.
I kind of got on the stump for
a while about organ donation.
I make a joke, you know, even
if you're a piano player,
you can donate an organ.
But the bottom line is we
have these spare parts.
And I think that's part of
how we increase our humanity
by doing things like that.
And there's an uptick
in organ donation
from strangers and
angel donors and stuff.
But still, when I went
through that process with her
when she was just
five years old,
I walked through the
halls of the hospital
the night before, knowing that I
might not wake up from surgery,
and that was OK.
But in every room
I passed, there
was somebody waiting for
someone else to die to live,
and that wasn't OK with me.
>>NOORY: Yeah, exactly.
There should be a better way.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
There is a better way--
sign the donor card.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah.
>>NOORY: And maybe one day
with stem cell technology--
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: No question.
>>NOORY: --we can
make our own kidneys.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I am waiting
for the day that the headline
news isn't something
bad that's happened,
but they figured out
a way to do that.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Stem cells,
what we're learning more
and more about inner space in
this machine that we have is
incredible.
And I look forward to that.
>>NOORY: What an industry
that could be, huh?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: All the money
is in illness, not wellness.
Once you figure out
the wellness part,
something like that, it'd
be the sky's the limit.
>>NOORY: Tell me what
happened years ago on top
of a state park.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Oh, boy.
So in one of the more
challenging times of my life,
I decided--
I think it was decided for me.
I just answered
the call-- that I
was going to walk from the
upper peninsula of Michigan
to Chicago and back on foot.
And I did this.
>>NOORY: [LAUGHS]
That's a long walk.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It's
1,000 miles round trip.
>>NOORY: I'm from Michigan.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah, so
you know how far that is.
And you can't walk
on the highway.
You kind of gotta zig zag
because it's against the law.
So the long and
short of it is it
was a very transitional time in
'96, and everything I had done
didn't work.
I was 37, college degree,
knew all the right people,
did all the right
things, and I still
ended up living in a motel
at my family with nothing.
But I had this recurring dream.
And in the dream, I'd
see myself walking.
And I took up on that,
and I walked to Chicago
with a couple other fellas.
And then they went home, and
then I headed back north.
And on the way back, outside
of Kettle Moraine State Park
in Wisconsin, I got
to the top of a bluff,
and I had this epiphany.
I was carrying this backpack.
And I'm a big guy, but
this was 85 pounds.
I'd been carrying--
>>NOORY: That's a big backpack.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It is.
And, George, I didn't know
90% of what was in that bag.
Other people packed it for
me in case I needed it.
And I dumped everything out.
And i-- don't need
this, I need this--
and I had this huge epiphany.
Most of my life,
most of our lives,
we walk around
carrying backpacks
that other people
stuffed for us.
And it gets heavy.
>>NOORY: There's a message here.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Oh, boy.
And it hit me so
hard, I broke down,
and I just dumped
everything out.
And I vowed from that point
on, I would never, ever again
let anybody stuffed my
backpack without telling me
what's in there.
And it has been a
huge change for me.
And so when I left there,
I was nearly about--
I think I left about
80% of it there.
It was like 30
pounds in the pack.
And I was light,
as you can imagine.
But this was this
pivot point for me.
And I realized that there's
something for me to do,
and I need to find
out what that is.
And I've learned from
that, especially the top
of that state park, where
a lot of people go--
and I have this image of
somebody getting to the top
and going, what's all
this stuff, you know?
Because I dumped it and left it.
>>NOORY: Freebies.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Freebies, exactly.
It was just this
huge pivot point,
that we are all called
to do something.
And that call usually
comes through difficulty.
Very rare is it through,
like, you win the lottery,
and your life gets--
most lottery winners
blow it anyway.
So the concept that
the good in our life
only comes when good
times are around us,
I think it's false narrative.
The most difficult, challenging,
backbreaking, neckbreaking,
knucklebreaking
times of our life
makes us who we are
because it squeezes us.
And you know, when you squeeze
orange juice, you get--
orange juice.
>>NOORY: Yeah, orange juice.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: You
squeeze tomato juice,
you get tomato
juice with tomatoes.
You squeeze humans, all
kind of crap comes out.
And we're the ones
doing the squeezing
without even knowing it.
And I believe life
is squeezing us
in a way to see what comes out.
And that's our chance to
become better, not bitter.
>>NOORY: Was this
an epiphany for you?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Huge.
Can you tell?
I get a little excited.
It's only 20-some odd years ago.
Yeah, the whole walk
was a huge deal for me,
but that particular point
on top of that ridge
was, like, I was going
up, I'd been climbing
my whole life to
do the right things
and live in a certain way,
and I I'd done some of that.
I went to college, I served
like you did in this military,
did all these things
that I thought
would get me where I wanted
to go, and it didn't work.
And so I was climbing, climbing,
climbing, climbing, climbing.
And I got to the
top, and I realized,
you can climb the
ladder of success,
but sometimes it's
against the wrong wall.
Who's going to figure
out what the wall is?
So I get to the top,
dumped all that stuff,
and ever since that day--
it hasn't always been
easy, but the dominoes
have fallen in a certain order.
I paid attention enough.
I kind of followed,
and it worked out.
>>NOORY: That's amazing for you.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It's tiring
and amazing at the same time.
This just doesn't
mean it's easy.
I don't mean to make this
some sort of big life coach
type of thing, because I
think there's far more to us
than meets the eye.
But life is set up in a certain
way to challenge us, And.
That's what brings
out the best or not.
And I'm all about that now.
Once the curtain's
pulled back a little bit,
I can't go back to sleep.
And that's, I think,
the big aha here
is our job, as I see it, while
we're here, is to wake up.
But it's not our job to
wake everybody else up.
Our job is to wake up and stay
awake as fully as possible.
If somebody's watching the
show or listening to you,
and then they go,
huh, instead of, huh?
That's the difference.
And I think when that
happens, a little door opens,
and people start moving
in a new direction.
But staying fully awake.
It's the work you've been
doing all these years.
What if?
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Answer
the what-if question.
Understand the why.
The how will take
care of itself.
>>NOORY: You spoke at a Ted
conference several years ago,
and it was pretty dramatic.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: What we're
here doing today is creating
moments.
And I'm here to submit to you
fully, with all validation,
a life-long suffering Cubs fan,
which I haven't figured that
part out yet--
that somehow, someway,
we create moments.
And moments then,
in turn, create us.
And what we're being charged
with today, as a group, all
of you sitting here,
all the speakers
that are here, all these
voices, that the challenges we
face as a humanity are
pale in comparison.
We went to the moon,
and then they came back!
They came back!
And again and again.
And they go up and
down all the time now.
And unfortunately, it's the 12th
story on the news, which sucks.
Because, to me, just
getting here in the plane
was a miracle.
I wasn't on time, but I got
here, you know what I'm saying?
So what I'm saying to you all,
really, in very short form,
is that all of our
lives are built
on the moments that
have created us,
the good ones and the bad ones.
They show us who we
are, and who were not.
And then we, in turn, off
that, create moments as well.
And then we do the
same more and more.
And now, it's called life.
The bottom line is,
if you're lucky,
you get just over 28,000 days
to play on this little blue ball
we call "Earth."
And I don't know if recognizing
that step process of thought,
word, and deed will
add years to your life,
but I guarantee you
this-- understanding
that moments matter will
add life to your years.
>>NOORY: Interesting take.
So that was representative
of the Earth.
I was wondering why you
were holding a baseball.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Well,
Cubs fan, you know,
so that talk was for NASA.
And if you talk
about being nervous,
an old radio guy like me in
front of 5,000 NASA scientists,
what in the world am
I going to tell them?
>>NOORY: They seemed like
they liked your presentation.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Well, I had
to make them laugh, right?
>>NOORY: That's right.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: When men
landed on the moon in July
of '69, the Cubs were playing
the Phillies that day.
Ron Santo went 4 for 4.
That was the biggest
news in my world.
>>NOORY: That was big.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It was huge.
Because the Cubs--
that was their year
they almost went to
the World Series.
But I had the thought
about using that baseball,
not only to metaphorically
talk about the moon,
but also about what was
going on with baseball.
And I ended up, at
the end of that, threw
that ball into the audience.
And this guy afterwards,
some scientists came up,
he said, would you
sign this baseball?
It was a little rubber
ball I got for $0.99.
But the concept
was, I am convinced
that most of the people in that
room, the moon landing for them
was an epiphany.
And it got them interested
in science, and space,
and all that kind of stuff.
So I needed to tie it in.
We actually showed a
clip of the moon landing.
And I still got chills
all those years later.
So it was a thrill to do that.
I did another Ted Talk
a few years later.
And I find myself amazed at
how far I've come in such a
very short time.
That's what I think evolution
within a lifetime is all about,
so I was thrilled to do it.
>>NOORY: Yeah, when you
look back at your career,
and where you are now, and
what you're doing now, would
you say that was a pretty
dramatic transition for you?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
George, listen,
I was sitting in the waiting
room, and I'm thinking,
I still don't believe
all this happens for me.
I don't know that it's
the luck of the draw,
it's a lot of hard work.
It's a difficult business
you and I are in.
And there's a lot of
things that go into it.
But when a calling becomes
a career, you know it.
And I think since
I got hurt at 19,
I woke up a little
bit the thing at 27
woke me up a little bit more,
I started saying yes to things
I never would have
said yes to before.
And the more I said yes,
the more stuff happened.
I was amazed at that.
And I do look at it.
I'm sitting here going, here I
am in Boulder with George Noory
again.
I have another book coming out.
I've got all this body
of work underneath me.
My best grades in school
are lunch and gym.
How does that happen?
Evolution.
>>NOORY: You talk
about life being 2.0.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I do.
>>NOORY: What does that mean?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: So the whole
concept of 2.0 is a better
version of something.
They came out with that
in early 2000s, you know?
And then you saw these
conferences of computers 2.0
and whatever it may be.
So the delineation of
2.0 is a bigger version
of what already exists.
And, for sure, my
life has been 2.0.
There's just no
way to predict it.
There's no way I could
have decided that this
is how my life would go.
And so I started looking
at all the things
that seem to be ordinary that
turned out to be extraordinary.
And then I realized,
for me, that it
was the little things
that were so extraordinary
and not the big
headline billboards.
Yes, it was great
to work with Oprah.
And yeah, it was
great to produce
the "Dr. Oz" show and travel.
It was all great.
>>NOORY: I like him.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Well, he's a great guy.
You guys would get along.
He's a great guy.
And the thing I learned
most from Mehmet
was, when the cameras were
off-- he's a natural on TV.
He's got all the right pieces.
>>NOORY: And Oprah
created him, didn't she?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And she did.
Well, on one hand--
>>NOORY: She's a genius.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: On one hand,
anybody sitting next to Oprah
for four minutes looks great.
She does it just right.
What Mehmet had was smart
enough to pick up and understand
he had to move from being
a scientist to a humanist.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
He had to do that.
When we first
started his show, we
had 59 minutes and
50 seconds to fill.
>>NOORY: That's a lot.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Much like
you, this is five days a week.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
We taped everything.
He after four minutes
he folded his arms
that's all I got how could
it be here that no one heart
surgeon in the
country so getting him
to where he could be
a humanist instead
of a scientist with my job.
But, yeah, he's done great.
But the thing I learned from
him, especially, like I said,
off screen, was I know that
his motive isn't awards or even
the number of people that watch.
He says, I want to keep people
off the operating table.
And how do you do
that prevention?
75% of the money we
spend in health care
is end-of-life care.
And the most bankruptcies
in our country
is because of medical bills.
So as you talked before
about stem cells,
if we can get to where
that opposite happens,
it's going to shift everything.
But working with all
of them was great.
And there was a huge epiphany.
They seem to be every
day for me at this point.
Oprah's great, and
Oz is great, and I
work with Gene Chatzky
and Bob Greene.
I had a great crew and
all these kind of things.
I realized that I was prepared
for this before I ever
got there.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And I didn't
know it until I got there.
And I think so many times in our
lives these opportunities come,
we don't think we're prepared
for them until we get there.
We go, wait a minute.
I know this.
And when I figured that
out, everything really
went to another level for me.
>>NOORY: I've got this Lincoln
Navigator in Los Angeles
that I keep out there.
And it's an older
model, but I love it.
It's a beautiful car, and
it's big, and it's safe.
And I'm meticulous, John, at
maintaining it to make sure,
like your body, it functions.
You don't want it to break down.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: That's right.
>>NOORY: So I bring
it in before it's due.
They take care of it and stuff.
And a couple of weeks
ago, I'm at a stoplight.
And all of a sudden,
it's chugging.
Its chugging.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Oh, no.
>>NOORY: I'm sitting there,
and it's going like that.
And I'm, going what the
heck is going on there?
This has never happened
to me therefore.
I take it into the
dealership, and the guy says,
I can't even fit you in today?
And I said, I can't
drive around with this
because you think
it's going to stall.
And with my hours,
you don't want
to stall on a freeway in LA
at 3:00 in the morning, right?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: No.
>>NOORY: So I drop it off,
he gets me a rental car,
and off I go.
He calls me back two days
later and says, it's $1,800.
And I said, $1,800?
What's wrong with it?
I take care of this thing.
It's meticulous.
I bring it in every four months
for its oil change and stuff.
And he said, two hoses broke.
And all the coolant dumped
into your spark plugs.
And all of them are gone.
They're destroyed.
We have to replace all of them.
But we have to get
into this thing.
And I said, $1,800?
And he said, yeah,
but it'll work.
So I did.
But that's the breakdown
of a human body.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: That's right.
>>NOORY: As much as you try to
maintain it and keep it fixed,
something goes wrong.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And you know,
that's such a sneaky thing.
Like, you think that'll never
happen because you maintain it.
And then it happens,
whether it's
a human being or a vehicle.
>>NOORY: When you
least expect it.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: When
you least expect it.
My nephew was hit
by a car on my way
out here, broke both his legs.
Like, 11 o'clock at night
crossing the street in Chicago.
He's 30 years old.
And I talked to him from the
hotel yesterday-- are you OK?
And he says, you
know, Uncle John?
He says--
>>NOORY: He's lucky
he's not dead.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: He's
lucky he's not dead.
He said, the first
thing, he's not dead.
He goes, maybe I needed this.
>>NOORY: Was he careless?
Was it his fault?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: No, it
wasn't even his fault.
But he was able to leverage this
and pivot in a way that maybe
something good can come from it.
And that's a massive change
in consciousness for this kid.
>>NOORY: How do you not see a
car coming your way, though?
Do you step back?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: 11 o'clock at
night, thunderstorm in Chicago.
He's crossing the street, had a
hood up to get out of the rain,
and somebody came around
the corner, never saw him.
He's wearing dark clothes--
>>NOORY: And he wasn't looking?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah,
so it was a convergence.
And I've learned that those
things, in my opinion,
my observation, and definitely
my experience, George, are not
accidents; they're incidents.
There's a huge difference.
>>NOORY: So for him,
it was a wake-up call?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah,
it was an incident.
An accident is,
you're the victim.
An incident is
you're a participant.
Shifts the energy.
So he could have
been in an accident.
And I'm sure that insurance
stuff will come out
of all this.
But when you change
into an incident-- so
when I got electrocuted,
it took me 10 years
to realize it
wasn't an accident.
Car accident took
a little shorter
because I was waking up.
But all these things
seemed to be something
I'm participating in,
not that I'm a victim of,
and I think that's what life
2.0 is about, is being able to,
at least on that
level, make that shift.
>>NOORY: Do people
learn by this or do
they miss their opportunity?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: That's
a really good question.
I think, without getting
too esoteric about it,
a huge metaphor for school--
lessons are repeated
till learned.
They just show up
in different ways.
And I think the opportunities
are there to learn from.
And if you do learn from
them, they will repeat.
But if you respond
as you learn, then it
can eventually
stop in my opinion.
And that's definitely
been my experience.
So I'll have something
that happened to me when
I was 18, 19, 20, and I'll see
a similar thing about 20 years
later, but I've
learned in between,
oh, I know what this is.
I don't have to repeat that.
I think our big
thing in life is,
when I'm doing a
work around the house
or whatever, I have a level.
And our job is keep the
bubble in the middle,
and life is
constantly doing this
to see if we can keep
our bubble in the middle.
Those are learning experiences.
But again, it really
comes down, for me,
is a conscious shift in
understanding that you're here,
that you're supposed
to be here, there's
things to do while you're
here, and that you're not
a cosmic accident.
And I think if you can
start looking at things
that way, other
things don't seem
as important as they used to.
>>NOORY: I had a
producer, John--
and you'll appreciate this being
from the radio industry, who
always came into work with
a black cloud over his head.
His day began with him saying,
I'm going to have a bad day.
Now I learned a long
time ago that when
you program yourself
to think that,
you're going to have a bad day.
I don't care what
happens to you.
It ain't gonna be a good day.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
You make it fit.
>>NOORY: And I kept trying
to tell the guy, who
was a nice guy, by the way.
Stop doing this to yourself.
You are programming
yourself for failure.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Right.
>>NOORY: Stop.
Why do people do that?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I think
there's a payoff in everything.
Somewhere in all of this,
this gentleman, and people
who are like that,
there's a payoff.
Some may feel sorry for him.
They pay attention to him.
George Noory's talking--
I don't know what it is.
But somewhere in all human
behavior is a payoff.
And there's negative
and positive
without-- there's
levels of those things.
But there are people that
have abhorrent behaviors
and continue to do
it because there's
a payoff somewhere in it.
Years, and years,
and years ago, I
spoke in Milwaukee at a
prison, just for people
who had committed DUIs.
These were repeat offenders--
over, and over, and over again.
And I went in there, and
there's all these guys there,
and they thought I
was going to throw
the Bible at them or
something and I don't do that.
And I walked in and I put on an
orange jumpsuit just like them.
Who's this guy?
I said--
>>NOORY: He's one of us!
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: That's right.
Exactly right.
Because one decision--
when I was younger,
I could have been them.
But I changed my
thought process.
And it wasn't a payoff anymore.
And I sat there and
talked with these people.
And some of were getting
out the next day,
and some weren't getting
out for a very long time.
And I asked them a question.
I said, so what's your
payoff in being here?
You thought I asked them
how to split the atom.
They had never thought of that.
Once you start thinking
about what is in this for me,
both positive and
negative, then you
can start learning
your own behavior,
undoing it if you have
the courage to do that.
And I sat down with a guy, and
I asked the first question.
I said, so do you want your son
or daughter-- do you have a son
or-- yes, I have a daughter.
Do you want her
in here with you?
Well, no.
Then why are you doing this?
What's the payoff.
He just started bawling.
And he unraveled his whole
life in just minutes.
And everybody in the
room nodded their head.
It was their story, too,
just change the character.
So in all human behavior, good
and bad, there's a payoff.
You do this because
there's a payoff.
Because I know that when
people listen to your show,
they're getting
something out of it.
They get lifted up a little bit.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: That's
why I do what I do.
And there are people who do
things the opposite direction,
that the payoff is different.
It's a lower energy
kind of thing.
But it's all about the payoff.
>>NOORY: Nothing thrills me more
than being at an event, John,
and somebody comes
up to me who has been
a listener of the radio show
or watches "Beyond Belief"
and says, you help me.
It's a great feeling.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: One of
the drivers picked me up
the airport.
We had a phenomenal
conversation here.
I always keep a couple extra
copies of my last book,
and I signed it to him
and gave it to him.
And I texted him,
I have a podcast.
He goes, where can I listen?
So I texted him the podcast.
And he sends me a
note back and he says,
this is why I continue
to drive 30 years later,
because of people like you.
And I said, it's because
of people like you
that I do what I do.
>>NOORY: That's great.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And that's
what makes the world different.
I believe that.
>>NOORY: I had a friend of mine
who I would always joke about,
and I called him "the cooler."
Because wherever he went,
something went wrong.
If he went to a casino with me.
I would lose if he was
sitting next to me.
He would get up and
leave, and I would win.
His life was that way, and
he passed away several months
ago of a prescription overdose.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Oh, boy.
>>NOORY: It was really sad.
But I think that was
part of that cooler life.
But we went to
the Riviera Casino
in Las Vegas as a little
birthday present for him
years ago.
And he was so negative
about everything,
even on your birthday.
Come on, have a great time.
You're not paying for anything.
It's on me!
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Right, right.
>>NOORY: My casino
host came up to me.
And for people who don't
know what hosts are,
hotels will assign somebody
to help you out here
with perks and stuff like that.
So she came, and
he talked to her,
and he gave her a hug,
introduced himself.
She died two weeks
later of a heart attack.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Are you kidding?
>>NOORY: And I'm going,
you've got to be kidding.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Wow.
>>NOORY: And then
three weeks later, they
announced the Riviera was
going to be demolished.
And they did.
They leveled the thing.
And I'm saying to
myself, was this him?
The cooler?
But everything I saw him
touch, something dramatic bad
happened.
Can people be doing
this to themselves?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: 100%.
Whether they can
affect other people,
I'm not smart
enough to know that.
I know that, I think, sometimes
the extent of my reach
really ends at my fingertips.
And other times, like
you, I'll get a note
from someone who will listen
to a show I did 10 years ago,
and I said thank you for that.
So I know it goes
further than that.
But I am convinced
that we are, more
than anything else, energy.
And the kind of energy
you generate attracts--
>>NOORY: Or repels.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: --or repels.
And we create ripple effects.
And those ripple effects--
like, if you throw a stone
in the water--
creates those concentric rings.
And I've always
thought two things
that I'd never heard in science.
The concentric rings
we think about normally
would be at the surface.
But they also go all the way
down, and you don't see those.
They also, when they hit an
object, they come back to you.
So literally what you
put out comes back.
And it may take years
for that to happen.
So this gentleman
you're talking about,
I can't imagine carrying
around that kind of energy.
I mean, I don't live like that.
>>NOORY: You can feel it.
Now he did his best--
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And you
can feel it, though, right?
>>NOORY: --to try to
convey that it wasn't him.
But, privately, those of us who
knew him knew that he did that.
You had another talk for
the Ted conference in 2017.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I did.
So here's the challenge.
To our linear learning mind,
life should look like this.
It should add up.
So if you go in a
straight direction
to do all the right things,
and meet all the right people,
go to the right school, make
the right amount of money,
it'll all turn out just fine.
So do you see what
we're doing here?
We have a linear learning
mindset that has been embedded,
not bad or good.
There's no class
action lawsuit here.
You don't get to sue anybody and
blame them because of the way
you learn.
You were just taught this.
But this is what we were taught.
It should all add up
because it always did.
You all know the
answer to 12 times 12,
and you haven't been
in class for how long?
It's burned in.
This is how life really is.
This is actually a chart
of my life right here.
There's the start and the end.
Rarely, if ever, adds up.
>>NOORY: 12 times
12, 144, right?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: You
get an apple for the day.
Yes, that's correct.
>>NOORY: Perfect.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And everybody
in the world knows that
because we all
grew up with that.
It's a base 10 system of
numbers that every human knows.
The challenge with that--
>>NOORY: New kids don't know it.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>NOORY: Exactly.
Without a computer, they
can't figure it out.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And that's
almost a whole other show.
I was thinking
about that as well,
is that I don't
know what's going on
with that electronic
learning, but hopefully
it benefits us at some point.
I don't see it right now.
But for guys like us, and
people around our age,
and in the last 20,
30, 40 years for sure,
this linear mindset
is what we grew up--
we sat in lines in school,
and we looked straight ahead,
and we learned our numbers
in a linear fashion.
>>NOORY: But we
learned it in our head.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yes,
and it burned literally.
And I learned this
from Mehmet Oz as well,
about how the brain
works, telomeres
and all this kind of stuff--
it literally becomes a burned-in
learning path in your brain.
And so if you say 12
times 12 to most people,
they'll know what the answer is.
And then we live our
lives in a linear fashion.
We drive straight,
we fly straight.
Everything's set
up in lines for us.
We wait in line, we're online.
And I realize at some
point that linear learning
is great for books,
and great for concept,
and great for theory,
and great for math,
but it has nothing to do
with human math, which is
another thing I came up with.
And I thought, why is
it guy like me, who's
best grades were not in math--
my dad was a banker.
And he loved it, but I
wanted nothing to do with it.
I didn't understand the
language of numbers.
And when I started to
understanding what was going on
and how the linear
way I learned was
almost a detriment to
the life I was living,
I had to figure something out.
And that's where
this talk came from.
It's called "Human Math."
The average life expectancy
is just about 78 years now.
And that's 28,835
days to be alive.
That's not very long.
But when we think of a linear
fashion, if you're born here,
you die here, you get
these average life.
There's no guarantee
of that number.
It is not guaranteed
like 144 is.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: So I was
figuring it this morning,
my latest number.
So if it's 28,835,
if I get that far,
I've already burned
up 21,900 days.
I got 6,800 days left.
That's either really depressing
or really invigorating.
And I think we need to
know those human math
numbers because it offsets
a lot of the negativity,
a lot of the ways
we waste our time.
And if you saw
that little chart,
I don't know anybody's life.
I know your life has been--
from growing up in Detroit
to being one of the top radio
hosts, no problem, right?
Straight line for you?
Of course not.
>>NOORY: No, there were
bumps along the road.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Of course.
>>NOORY: Big ones.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
But what happens is,
because we have
that linear mindset,
we don't know how to handle
that stuff, and it handles us.
So that's part of
the learning curve.
And learning that there's
no guarantee you're
going to be here
tomorrow, I think,
is a great way to
start doing what
you're supposed to do today.
>>NOORY: Which is
interesting, because the way
I look at things personally
is tomorrow's my last day.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Well, you have to.
>>NOORY: And every
day I get to tomorrow,
I move it a day ahead--
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: That's right.
>>NOORY: --a day ahead.
So I don't look at
it and say, well,
I've got 25,000 days left or--
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
You've got one.
>>NOORY: I've got one left.
And make it your best.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Do you
remember when that happened
for you?
Was it a thing, or just
always been that way?
>>NOORY: I think it
happened back in 2000.
I had some personal
health issues myself.
I thought I always took care
of myself, never smoked--
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: You're
the Lincoln Navigator.
>>NOORY: --watched my diet.
But, like the Lincoln Navigator,
something went wrong that day,
and I got it fixed.
And it changed my perspective
of a lot of things.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: See, that's a
wake-up call that you didn't go
back to sleep from.
And my experience
has been, most people
go back to sleep from those.
You stayed awake.
>>NOORY: You have to.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: You have to.
Well, you don't have to.
It's a great option.
>>NOORY: You should.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: You should.
And, as I said, waking
up is an obligation.
The more you wake up, the
more you get to wake up.
And I think that's probably
why you do what you do.
>>NOORY: You've
also, in addition
to everything you've done,
you care about the planet,
as a planet.
How did this happen for you?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It's
Teddy Roosevelt's fault.
I was 10 years old, I'm
reading a book called--
>>NOORY: You weren't here
when Roosevelt was here?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: No, no, no.
>>NOORY: Not Teddy!
Maybe Franklin.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Not even
Franklin and not even Eleanor.
But when I was 10 years old,
I read a story about him
in a Childcraft series of books.
I was 10.
And it was about him finding a
dead harbor seal in New York.
And it had died, and
they put it on display.
And he went down and measured
it and all this kind of stuff.
And when the seal
was too smelly,
they dumped it in the water,
but they took the skull,
and they gave it
to Teddy Roosevelt.
His name was Teedie then.
And they gave it
to young Teedie.
T-E-E-D-I-E, they called him.
And it became the first
specimen and would eventually
become the Roosevelt
Natural History Museum.
And I don't know what
about that grabbed me.
I thought, you mean,
there's more to life
than just sitting here
in Chicago eating cereal?
It was just an odd thing.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>ST. AUGUSTINE: And
then, over time, I
read everything about this guy.
And I think the pivot point
for me was in 19 aught 8--
I love saying "aught."
We don't get to say
"aught" as much.
We could though, right?
>>NOORY: We could if we want to.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: 2 aught--
>>NOORY: I don't think
I've ever used that.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I like it.
Maybe I'm from another time.
But anyway, 19 aught 8,
the iron ore mining lobby
wanted to take the Grand Canyon
apart and dig for iron and ore.
And they were within
about 30 votes
of that happening in Congress.
So if you think things are crazy
now, they were always crazy.
And TR said, we gotta
leave this alone.
And he created the
Antiquities Act,
which eventually created
a lot of national parks
and those kind of things.
When I read that story,
on top of him being
as a kid, this other
thing, I thought,
we're supposed to do something
with the life support systems
that we depend on.
And you can argue about all
the scientific evidence,
but I come from a spiritual
end of this thing--
is that there are billions
of species on this planet.
We're just one of them.
And they don't depend on
us, but we depend on them.
>>NOORY: Yep.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And that right
there should be enough to get
moving in a different direction.
>>NOORY: You lived for 20
years with the Ojibwa Native
Americans.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I did.
>>NOORY: How did that happen?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: So that whole
walk thing in '96, I ended up
living in this motel owned
by Bruce and Pat Hardwick,
who are Native American folks.
And Bruce is an elder of the
Ojibwa Nation-- and the three
fires, and he's still there.
And he's got this
long white hair,
and he's just like a
prototypical guy you'd see.
And Dwayne Kanart, who is one
of the other gentleman who
took the walk with
me is also Ojibwa.
And I, coming out of
the Chicago existence,
it was like walking into
a movie with these people.
And I learned, and listened,
and was so fascinated
by their customs,
and their traditions,
and the respect they
had for each other.
They have these lodges.
And when one person's
talking, nobody else--
there's no questions.
You could talk all
day, and people
respect what you have to say.
I didn't come from
a city like that.
I didn't grow up that way.
And so all these
traditions and things,
they started to make more sense
to me than the way I grew up.
And one of the biggest lessons
I took away from them is a word
called [NON-ENGLISH].
>>NOORY: [NON-ENGLISH]
>>ST. AUGUSTINE: [NON-ENGLISH].
And [NON-ENGLISH] means, "that
which expands keeps expanding
for better or for worse,"
almost like that ripple effect.
And so they're very, very
conscious of their actions.
Because of what we said before,
they know what they've sent out
will expand.
And it will keep
expanding, and keep
expanding because of energy,
and how we treat each other.
And so you have to be mindful
of every second, every moment,
every conversation, every word
that comes out of your mouth--
your thoughts, your
countenance, how your stance is.
That's a huge
responsibility if you're
to going to be human
and not just be
a human being or a human doing.
And that was a massive shift
for me, that which expands
keeps expanding.
You've got to watch what you
do, what you say, who you are,
where you go, how you
act, and most people, they
don't have those thoughts.
>>NOORY: How did they
learn how to live this way?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I think
you'd have to ask them.
I don't know that I'm the
best representative of that.
But I think their traditions,
over many, many millennia,
they kind of got watered down
and brought back, watered down
and brought back, and preserved.
And it's interesting to me,
especially these two guys.
One was a boilermaker
for 30 years.
The other guy worked
at a paper mill.
You'd never know-- they traveled
the world, spoken at the Hague,
peace conferences-- asked to
speak on their traditions.
And they are not
celebrated authors.
They're not media people.
But they are solid in who
they know that they are
and who they know they're not.
>>NOORY: And great humans.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
And great humans.
And that is so needed.
That is the balance, in
my opinion, the erosion
the rest of us kind of create.
>>NOORY: What are we doing to
the planet these days, John?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Well,
there's good things.
I think the good things
are that there is somewhat
of a consciousness
and awareness.
I remember when
I was growing up,
there was those
commercials with the--
people throw garbage
out of their car,
and the Native American guy
would have a tear on his face,
even though he was
really Italian.
>>NOORY: I loved
that commercial.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
He was Italian.
Do you know this?
>>NOORY: I didn't know that.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
He was Italian!
>>NOORY: I don't
want to know that.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: He's Italian.
>>NOORY: Oh, my gosh.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: But he
played a good Native American--
>>NOORY: He did.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: --so I
guess that's what worked.
And so we've gotten
out of where you
don't see people throw garbage
out of their cars anymore.
When I was a kid growing up,
my dad would change the oil
and dump it in the sewer.
No thought process to it.
>>NOORY: Not anymore.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
No, you can't do it.
So in that way, in
my lifetime I've
seen some of those things
change dramatically.
You know, Dick Nixon was
not an environmentalist,
but he was a smart politician.
So when the Cuyahoga River
was on fire in 1970, '69, '70,
he created the EPA because
he knew it was a smart move.
It'd get him votes.
So there are things that
happen that have to happen.
And on the other
side of the coin,
we have people
battling over the--
if there's one thing
humans know how to do
is major in minor things.
We know how to argue while
nature acts, as Voltaire said.
So we have a long way to
go, and there are things
in the air that don't belong.
There's things in the water that
weren't supposed to be there.
Manmade chemicals that should be
nowhere near other human beings
that we're ingesting.
And that's a major
challenge for us.
>>NOORY: It sure is.
Now you've written,
produced, and aired
over 300 episodes of what
you call "Earth Matters."
Let's take a look.
>> There are many different
kinds of invasive species that
threaten life in the
waterways of America.
But recently, a new manmade
scourge has surfaced.
Zebra mussels have
decimated the waters
of the Great Lakes, consuming
plankton at such a high rate
that actually threatens the
fish population in that area.
But who knew that simply
washing your face or hands,
or even brushing your
teeth, would put a substance
into the water that
never goes away.
Researchers have discovered
vast amounts of plastic microbe
beats, the abrasive particles
that scrub away dirt and grime,
then get washed down the
drain and, eventually, end up
in the water system.
The beads don't dissolve.
The best way you can help
to keep polyethylene out
of the water is to simply use
a good biodegradable soap.
I'm Bill Kurtis,
and Earth Matters.
>>NOORY: Good ol' Bill Kurtis--
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Good ol' Bill Kurtis.
>>NOORY: --from Chicago.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah.
>>NOORY: What makes
that clip so important?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: First
of all, it's a no-brainer.
Polyethylene does not
belong in our water supply,
I don't care who
you are, number one.
The beads are so small they get
through the water filtration
systems.
They end up mostly
in the Great Lakes.
Fish eat them.
Humans eat fish.
Not a good thing.
The most important
part about that,
which is episode 83
I believe out of 300,
was that a Chicago alderman,
kind of like a local politician
kind of guy, he heard that.
And he got word to an Illinois
state's person, a state
representative, who, along
with other media sources,
pulled all this together.
We were kind of the first
to ring the bell on this.
And they came up with a bill
to ban polyethylene beads
in the state of Illinois.
That bill got pushed
further and further
up the ladder, and
one of the last things
that Obama did before he left
office was to ban polyethylene
beads nationwide.
So about a year
after that aired,
Bill was doing a talk
somewhere in Cleveland,
I believe, and the president of
the company came up and said,
I heard your Earth Matters.
I had no idea that
this was going on.
I just used facial scrub.
So now, I just use soap.
It may not seem like a huge
deal, but it's a huge deal.
Because one little
piece of information
can lead to transformation
if it's repeated enough.
And, again, to help
get polyethylene out
of the water supply,
we're good with that.
>>NOORY: Who would
ever know that?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Nobody knows that!
That's why we do
what we do, George.
We're supposed to take
information people would never
find and give it to them so
they can make better decisions.
And when I read this little
tiny article, probably
in the Chicago
Tribune, I don't know,
three, four, five years ago, I
thought, I've never heard this.
So I built it out, and
it repeated and repeated,
somebody heard it, the
ripple effect took place.
And here we go.
>>NOORY: Tell me about your
thoughts of this beluga whale
episode that you
had in your life.
What was that about?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Oh, boy.
You're gonna put me on
the spot with this one?
>>NOORY: Uh-huh.
We've done our homework.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: [SIGH] I was
on WGN radio for a few years.
I loved it.
It was one of the
highlights of my career
to sit on Michigan Avenue and
talk to half a million people
every day.
And it was fantastic.
And part of that is--
>>NOORY: Powerhouse station.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Say again?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Oh, it was legendary.
Just like anywhere we've been,
you know who the big ones are.
And WGN was that for me.
Even the Oprah stuff was
great, but getting to WGN,
sitting on Michigan
Avenue from 3:00 to 7:00
in the afternoon on a Friday?
>>NOORY: That's huge.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: That's huge.
It was great.
Anyway, one of the things was,
I wanted people to experience
what was going on in Chicago.
Obviously, with the environment,
it's important to me,
and we have the shedd
aquarium in Chicago,
which is a fantastic place.
And, at the time,
they had what was
called "The Beluga Encounter."
And you could get in the water
with a beluga whale, which you
could never do anywhere else.
And another one of those
things, like, I mean,
I feel like I was nine.
I could do this?
And the whole idea was they
would charge like $250.
The money would go to help
preserve belugas and things
like that.
And so we set it up.
And I got into the water
with this beluga whale,
which was 18 feet long
and about 3,000 pounds.
And I remember two things.
>>NOORY: [LAUGHS]
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I know.
I get in the water, and
it's a smaller tank, about
the size of your set,
and the water just rose.
And I went-- it was
so cool, number one.
And this enormous mammal
comes up, enormous mammal,
with this huge dome head.
>>NOORY: And you're there.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
And I'm right there.
They say, keep your arms
in in your little overalls
so they don't think
you're doing hand signals
and think you're a fish--
>>NOORY: And eat you.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Exactly.
Take your fingers off.
And it was so humbling because
there's this enormous animal
that could care less about me.
And I cared so much about it.
And at one point,
the trainer says,
we'll have this thing where
you can interact and do
these things, and we'll
have you touch foreheads.
>>NOORY: Is that strange?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Well, it's
not like a cat that bumps you.
This is a beluga whale.
And so--
>>NOORY: In one snap,
there goes your head.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah.
And whatever they felt like
they needed to do, right?
So there was a little bit
of a fear factor there.
But there's a trainer--
I don't know what they
were gonna do, but--
>>NOORY: Yeah,
what could they do?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Nothing.
>>NOORY: Once this thing
chomps down on you, that's it.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Right.
So I'm going on the fact
that, as far as I know,
no beluga whales have
ever eaten a human being,
so I'm hoping it stays that way.
And we put our heads together,
and they took this picture.
And it was not just the picture
that was important to me,
but this thought came.
And I am convinced
to this day that it
wasn't my thought, that
interspecies communication--
do you have animals?
Do you have pets?
>>NOORY: I did.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: OK, so
there's a communication.
Even though you don't
verbally hear it all the time.
>>NOORY: It's telepathy.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Sure.
This whale gave me an idea.
And the idea was, what if there
was a whale that could tell you
what's going on from
a whale's perspective
under the water and all
the rest that's going on
and there was a way
to understand them
in a human voice?
What would you do about it?
I didn't even know
what that means.
So it set me off
looking, and I started
doing research on whales.
And there's a whale that
surfaces about every six years
and that it has a call
unlike any other whale.
And they can't find it.
The Navy, your guys, have
the whole ocean mapped out,
and they can't find this whale.
And it's pitch is so
high that it's not easily
picked up on sonar.
And so this whale roams--
nobody responds to its call.
It's called the
loneliest whale in world.
And it got me working
on a book, of course.
And the concept is, which--
I'm getting a little
ahead of myself here
because the book's no
nowhere near done--
but the thought was
that this animal somehow
triggered something in my
mind and gave me this idea
that I never would
have thought of
or had had we not met in the
Shedd Acquarium that way.
>>NOORY: Isn't that interesting?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It
keeps me up at night.
How is that possible?
I think it's because
the more weak you get,
the more you say yes, the
more happens that you'd never
thought would happen.
>>NOORY: What do you think
of extraterrestrial life?
Do you ever contemplate that?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I think
they're already here.
>>NOORY: Yeah?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I do.
But I don't see
them as, like, ET.
I see us as a
species, and there are
people who have extra stuff.
And I call those our
extraterrestrials.
I had occasion a few weeks
ago to have a conversation
with Jane Goodall.
She's an extraterrestrial.
>>NOORY: She's still
doing her thing.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
85 years young.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
300 days a year.
>>NOORY: Amazing person.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: More
busy than you are.
85 years old, 300 a days a year.
She was talking about, in the
1960s, somewhere in there,
she came to a
conference in Chicago.
She came out of the jungle
of Tanzania as a scientist,
went to a conference,
and became a humanist,
and changed her life.
She said, that's where
something extra happened.
And I thought, that's
extraterrestrials.
So we're all terrestrial
on this planet.
But those of us who
I see the extras
is the people who are doing
things that are extraordinary.
And I think that's
where we look.
I am not here to discount
anything else that's going on.
That's not my deal.
But I will say that
the people that I've
run into over my lifetime--
Teddy Roosevelt was
an extraterrestrial.
Jacques Cousteau was
Anybody that's reached
outside of themselves
is an extraterrestrial.
And they bring something extra
to the deal that we have here.
And I like to think, at times,
I did it right enough to go,
yeah, I think my dad
would say, yeah, you're
an extraterrestrial.
>>NOORY: This latest
book, "Phenomenon,"
tell me about this.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I
didn't want to write it.
>>NOORY: Why not?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It's personal.
And in Every Moment Matters,
I had a couple chapters
that were personal that were
real difficult to write.
And I started
thinking, well, again,
like if someone's
listening to your show,
if it helps somebody, because
we're all kind of in this
together.
>>NOORY: That's
what it's all about.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It is.
And we all have
same wiring, but we
have different contact points.
So maybe somebody wasn't
electrocuted when they were 19,
but they know what it feels like
to have some sort of an injury
or whatever.
So I wrote these things.
This book has been
bothering me for 10 years.
And I started making notes
over a period of time.
And I started to
realize that there
was this connect the dots of
things I could not explain.
And that's good and
bad at the same time.
It's good because
maybe that's humbling.
The bad part is, I'm
always going, now what?
Now what?
And so I named the book
"Phenomenon" because,
to me, that is the
perfect description--
>>NOORY: I love that
title, by the way.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Well, yeah.
Remember the movie
with John Travolta?
>>NOORY: Uh-huh.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I feel like--
>>NOORY: He got zapped.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: That's
kind of how I feel.
Like I got hurt at 19,
and ever since then
all this other stuff
started happening.
I don't know that it's the
total reason a lot of this stuff
has taken place in my life,
but I feel like it's the crux.
And everything has
followed since that,
so it made sense
for me to do that.
It's message, and moments,
and memories and other stuff
I can't explain in this book.
And every time I go
back and relive them,
I'm once again
learning that there's
no time limit on the
lessons we're supposed
to learn while we're here.
And so some of the
chapters in the book,
they've happened 15,
20, 25 years ago,
and in writing them again,
they not only come alive,
I learn something different.
I see who I was then.
I look at the lesson
that happened.
And, once again, I think, this
is just the most amazing life
experience--
>>NOORY: Each chapter is just
as important as the next one.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I
could move them around,
and they're not in any
chronological order.
>>NOORY: Right.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And they're
all so impactful to me that it
was hard to decide.
I put 12 in there, so--
>>NOORY: You had a
chapter on Mother Mary.
What's that about?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Working for Oprah, Radio.
This is in 2008.
And every week, I would
drive back and forth
from the UP to Chicago.
I needed that time.
I still had family in
the upper peninsula.
And so I would drive
back and forth.
It was about 1,000 miles, as I
mentioned, round trip, driving,
a little less.
And one day, I'm driving back
and minding my own business,
and it's nice fall day, and
I got my old [INAUDIBLE],,
and I got the top
open and music on,
and I'm coming into the bustling
metropolis in Marinette,
Wisconsin on US Highway
41, split north and south.
And I happened to look across
at this cheese place, where
I always buy cheese.
And there at the access
road is this vision
of the Virgin Mother, glowing.
>>NOORY: Only you could see it.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I don't know.
I was the one on the highway.
It was afternoon.
It wasn't middle of night.
And there was this
apparition there.
And I'm not even Catholic.
And it blew my doors off.
And I got so emotional.
And I heard in my head,
this voice, female voice,
and it said, "the blessings
of the walk will come now."
I had to pull over.
I was bawling.
I looked back, it was gone.
>>NOORY: Really?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Yeah, totally gone.
I pick up the phone,
my cell phone,
I call the guy I
walk with, Dwayne,
the Native American
guy, and I'm glad he
answered the phone because I
can't imagine the voicemail.
Hey, Dwayne, it's John.
Yeah, the Virgin Mother was
over here on the highway,
and I don't know what's--
He answered, I told
him what happened.
And he said, yep.
That was it.
What do you mean, yep?
This is Jesus's mom
showing up here.
What's this all about?
>>NOORY: Giving me a message.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah,
and he's like, yep.
He goes, you're gonna
have to search it out.
This is a guy who would
spend a year on one word.
So my Western mind,
my whatever mind,
wanted to know what
that meant right now.
And it wasn't possible.
So I did a little digging,
and these Marian apparitions
are things that happen.
>>NOORY: They happen.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: But not
to me they don't, right?
I have no Catholic--
I was baptized, but
everything else-- that's it.
I don't have icons.
There was no reason for this.
Oddly enough, while I'm
writing this chapter,
10 years later, I
get a phone call
from a friend of mine who does
not know I'm working on a book.
And he starts telling me
about a mutual friend of ours
who was in radio for years,
lives in Detroit, actually now.
His name's Kevin Matthews.
And Kevin had an
experience where
he found the Virgin Mother
statue broken by a dumpster.
>>NOORY: Oh, geez.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And
so he wanted to buy it.
And the florist
wouldn't sell it to him
until she heard his voice.
Because our radio guys,
they know us by voice.
She goes, I know who you are.
You're Kevin Matthews.
I'll sell it to you.
So he bought the thing,
took it home, had no hands.
It was broken in half.
It sat in his garage.
He went to his local
priest and asked
if he could have
somebody help fix it.
And he said, yeah,
I got the guy.
We can make her brand new--
He goes, no, I want her just put
back together, but that's it.
Leave the crack, leave the
hands, the whole thing.
And it became the broken
Mary project for him.
Totally shifted his life.
We didn't even really
know each other
until I reached out about what
I'm writing, what he's doing.
That's 10 years after
this happened for me.
So not a week or two
later, he invites
me to come listen to
his talk in Chicago.
And I go to this church, and he
brings the broken Mary statue.
And I'm sitting there going,
this all started for me
on a highway 10 years ago.
I don't know what
the odds are of that.
I don't want to think
about the odds of that.
>>NOORY: And there are no
coincidences, you know that.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Well, there
isn't, yet our brain tries
to compartmentalize, and make
it fit, and make it work,
and understand it, and
it's still going on.
And it's that
ripple effect again.
It keeps going and going.
And so I sat there and watched
people listen to his story.
This is a guy who,
on radio, was a shock
jock and not prone to this.
And his transformation
is uncanny.
So I think that, once again,
that our opportunities
come when we're most broken.
And that's what my
life has been about,
whether it's being electrocuted,
or given up a body part,
or you name it.
It's always in the worst of
times that the best comes out.
>>NOORY: You know
the late John Denver
and mentioned him
Phenomena as well?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I did.
I did.
>>NOORY: He went too
soon, way too soon.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah,
but on the other hand,
I like to think, as you say, if
tomorrow's our last day that we
all come in on time
and leave on time.
And over the 20-some-odd
years since he's been gone,
I kind of think that I
would rather he were here,
but he did what he
was supposed to.
He lived three
lifetimes in 53 years.
That's for sure.
But there's a whole
chapter in the book on him
as well, because he
just keeps showing up.
And I don't know why.
>>NOORY: In your life?
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah.
After he passed away,
I had this dream.
It was every
Wednesday for a week--
every Wednesday.
He died on a Sunday.
Every Wednesday for a week, he
would show up in this dream.
>>NOORY: He had this
homemade little plane.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah,
he bought it from a guy
for $60,000.
It was a long, easy
experimental aircraft handmade.
And he had done some
takeoffs and landings.
And he went up again.
And, apparently,
there was something
to do with the fuel handled,
the way it was positioned,
and aerodynamics took over.
When he went to switch
to the fuel tank,
his left foot was on the pedal.
It put it into a roll.
>>NOORY: And down he went.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: 500 feet,
you're not coming out of that.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: So that's
difficult and challenging,
and yet, God, I'd
be hard pressed.
I still stay in touch with
Andy, and his brother Ron,
and we all are still friends.
And I've asked Ron many times,
is there any solace in the fact
that he died--
what he loved to do was flying.
He said, no.
So I don't know about
that part of it,
but what I do know is that I
think when you're with somebody
that has impact and
moment in your life
and you're connected
to, that doesn't
end when they die on a
lot of different levels.
And, for John, he'd show up
in this dream every Wednesday.
And the last dream, he finally
said, my guitars aren't where
they're supposed to be.
And I called his manager, and
I said, I have this dream.
He goes, how would
you know this?
That's what John told me.
Nobody knows this.
Well, he knows, and he told me--
>>NOORY: And he told you.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
And he told me.
So that's been one part
of it, and I've had some--
>>NOORY: That's incredible.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: It is.
And things in the lodge that
have happened and stuff.
So he's this constant
present in my life--
presence and present--
and I wouldn't even
be doing what I'm doing
if it wasn't for him.
He kind of plucked me
from obscurity in '92
and put me on a
stage in '94 in Aspen
in front of a bunch of people
before I had written books
or done radio.
And he says, your voice matters.
You're supposed to do something.
Three years later, he was gone.
>>NOORY: He was right.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE:
Well, we'll see.
>>NOORY: He was right.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: We'll see.
>>NOORY: And people
matter, don't they.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yes.
I am hard pressed
sometimes to say
I'm a fan of the human
species, because we seem
bent on destroying ourselves.
>>NOORY: Sometimes.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: And
yet, I think we're still
in the evolutionary-- we are the
youngest species on the planet,
and we act that way.
We're late-comers to the game--
250,000 years, depending
how you look at it.
So everything else
was already here,
and that's why I was
kind of touting that.
We're the latest to the game.
We always do the most damage.
We are the most significant
insignificant species
on this planet.
We're the only
species that is been
on affecting the life support
systems that keep us alive
for cash.
And so I do my
utmost, as you do--
and that's why I so
appreciate what you do--
because once
consciousness lifts,
once somebody
makes a change, you
don't know what they're
going to do later that could
change the course of history.
20 years ago, I'd go out
and do talks in schools
and talked about
the ozone layer.
And the Montreal Protocol
was eventually signed right
when I was doing these talks.
And I said, who knows
that some kid in this room
is going to figure out, because
of something that was said here
today, a way to make sure
that the chlorofluorocarbons,
or the CFCs that do the
damage to the ozone,
that they can't figure
out how to stop that.
You don't know that.
That's what the
ripple effect is.
But these things
are all connected.
So I'm a fan of humans
most of the time.
The other times, I'm
kind of like, well--
>>NOORY: What was that
movie with Al Pacino?
"Devil's Advocate?"
"I'm a fan of man."
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: That's
right, except when I'm not.
>>NOORY: So true.
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: Yeah.
Thanks for being
on "Beyond Belief."
>> ST. AUGUSTINE: I'm
always honored to see you.
Good to see you.
>>NOORY: It's an amazing
story of John St. Augustine
and how his life has
changed and yours can, too.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[OUTRO MUSIC]